extraordinary people doing
extraordinary things
by the end of a 21-day
excavation we had discovered the
richest early hominid site ever
discovering this site is one
mile away from the site of
Stuart contain it's less than
half that distance from the
second best known site in the
entire continent of Africa the
side of swore crowns 800 meters
away
it was right under our nose it
was an incredible environment of
signs there we had a fossil tent
where we kept joking that we
need a bigger safe and we had to
buy more boxes and more bags and
we ever envision we'd set up a
thing to find a skeleton and we
had first hundreds of remains
and by the end of it thousands
of remains of holidays we would
work late into the night
I sometimes couldn't get the
scientists out of the cave as
they excavated four shifts of
six or seven hours in these
cramped humid conditions and no
one could go get them anyway so
they could just stay there as
long as we want some people have
said well it really isn't that
dangerous
rick is going to demonstrate to
you though that just because we
did not kill anyone that this is
every bit as dangerous and
extraordinary a risk
this has ever been undertaken
these are the easy parts you're
looking at this was an original
thing we called Superman crawl
which you go through i can get
through that so that's not a
particularly tight squeeze in
the scheme of what we're doing
here
for those of you who are
squeamish about closed spaces
you may look away because it
gets worse
the this is the type of journey
that these remarkable scientists
the runners people who assisted
us would take on a daily basis
usually three four five times a
day
getting to these sites some
people said to me why haven't
you open this cave up
I hope you can begin see how
fragile this case is you do not
want to do any opening of caves
in that environment because if
you do you may destabilize the
entire system and it could
collapse and secondly I didn't
want to do that
who was it for me to destroy a
cave this potentially millions
of years old just so it could be
large enough that my ego can get
in there when there is
technology and extraordinary
people who have the capability
of doing that work today
here this is kind of a normal
narrow passage
you're going to see the shoot
and parts of it here and you'll
get an idea of the depth as you
see Steve Tucker's light in the
distance as we look down into
the shoot you an idea of how
narrow those spaces are that
they are traversing down you'll
see out dangerous some of the
loose rocks are this rock that
Rick is about to touch actually
fell on the National Geographic
photographer and shattered his
fingers as he was under there
oh and Rick can dislocated
shoulders
watch I just show you that for
fun
extraordinary people doing
extraordinary things
by the end of a 21-day
excavation we had discovered the
richest early hominid site ever
discovered in the history of the
planet more fossil hominids had
come out individually have been
discovered in the previous
90-year history of the search
for human origins in southern
Africa all because of these
remarkable scientist
we would name a new species Homo
already home in the lady was an
incredible creature a brain the
size of the orange primitive
characters in advance characters
teeth that are remarkable and
being a little bit human-like
and the primitive in so many
other ways things we've never
seen before we would eventually
find 15 individuals 1574 fossils
from an area that big by that
pig the entire floor is
comprised of these fossils we
had every age group represented
from near fetal aged infants to
the extreme elderly with their
teeth Warren right out and
everything in between males and
females we had fossils like this
field has never seen before
that is the most complete foot
ever discovered in the history
of paleoanthropology one of six
this is the most complete hand
ever discovered in the history
of paleoanthropology one of
eight the assemblage was
remarkable remarkable its
diversity remarkable in its
preservation remarkable in its
quality
we simply had seen nothing like
it
all line on the floor of this
chamber we would name a new
species Homo already
it's a crazy creature brain the
size of an orange ape-like
shoulders human-like arms ending
in a human-like and with the
most curved fingers we have ever
seen outside the most primitive
hominids 45 million year old
equivalent
it's bizarre its thorax starts
ape-like becomes more and more
advanced its pillow
this is like that of Lucy wide
and flared so we know what its
legs and feet look like they
should be primitive - but they
are at the top and become
progressively more and more and
more and more human-like until
you reach the feet and those are
the most human-like feet ever
discovered since humans
look at the size of that head
that is a normal-sized modern
human in the background
that is an adult female of Homo
know anything about 450 cubic
centimeters
we had truly never seen anything
like this
to give you an idea of how
strange they would have looked
that's Lucy on the left in the
middle is a very famous skeleton
culture convoy of Homo erectus
and there you can see a
relatively human-like visit
there on the right is that
almost without being derogatory
pinheaded look of hormonal etty
with it's very strange profile
and it is not in a barren see
because we have multiple
individuals and they all look
exactly alike
we now know more about this
remarkable species perhaps than
almost any other species of
primitive human relatives that's
ever been discovered
we very quickly realized
something was strange going on
with the way in which these
fossils were in that chamber
during the course of the
excavation we had found on the
first day to be transparent
three bird bones were owl
they were lying on the surface
that were clearly much younger
somehow it got in there and then
we found during the course of
the excavation a few tiny rodent
in sizers mixed into the
sentiment and nothing else
nothing but hominids now we add
on the team world experts in
many many different things but
all of us had the same basic
training in Physical
Anthropology forensic
anthropology archaeology all
related to human biology and
those senior members team knew
there was something very strange
from word go
when you see in the simplest
like that we of course began
trying to eliminate the obvious
it's got to be a predator
accumulation but there are no
predatory damn marks of day
image on any of this phone
there's no marks of scavenging
we knew very early on that the
material had not been
transported in there was no sign
in the sediments of water
transport
we also could tell from the way
they were set that they come in
one by one by one
over time there was time
involved in this over on the
right-hand side of this image is
where that shoot is you can see
that the floor slopes away from
that and quite literally from
that point all the way to the
end
are these bones of home already
literally from underneath the
shoot we have used i can tell
you ground-penetrating radar and
other methods we can find no
other entrance and we were left
eventually with the unlikely
conclusion that in fact this
must be some sort of deliberate
body disposal site that we had
for the first time
found a species other than
humans that in a ritualized and
I mean repeated fashion had
taken its dead into a chamber
and secreted them there
over time to prevent whatever
from happening to them for
whatever reason and that is the
hypothesis we put forward
that's a fairly remarkable thing
because until that moment on sep
tember 10 last year when we
announced the existence of home
already and this situation we
had seen deliberate body
disposal is sort of the last
bastion of what identified us as
human when Jane Goodall wrote to
Lewis Lee he saying i have seen
a chimpanzee using tools
he said prophetically we're
going to have to redefine what
it means to be human
we had precious little left
until sep tember tent except we
deliberately disposed of our
dead and whatever that means and
should this hypothesis hold true
for the first time in history
you are meeting another species
that did just that
what these discoveries tell you
is that we may have walked or
set foot over most of this
planet but we have not seen what
we were walking on
we have not understood what we
were looking at
there are extraordinary things
to be found and if it is true in
a field like paleoanthropology
then it must be true in every
field of science we need to use
discoveries like this to inspire
this and the next generation to
be explorers to get out in the
field to look to prepare
yourself to make discoveries to
use the technology to inform you
but to physically go out and
make those discoveries we need
ladies and gentlemen to inspire
exploration
thank you very much
yeah